It's a great it's a great honor to to
talk to you in our podcast.
>> Well, thank you very much.
>> So, uh my friend, uh thank you for for
being here and uh what what what do you
think about doing some presentation?
Talk a little bit about yourself.
>> Yeah. Well, I'm I'm a professor of
biology here at Boston College in
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts.
uh half the university is in Boston and
the other half is in Chestnut Hill which
is part of Newton. Um yeah, so I'm
teaching biology uh and uh cancer
metabolism in my in my professorial role
here and I also have an very active
research program both in vivo and in
vitro studies on cancer metabolism
u and this keeps me occupied uh to a to
a large extent.
>> Yeah. How long how long are you studying
cancer? [snorts] Well, I I um when you
say studying cancer, how long have I
been studying biochemistry and genetics?
Is a more important question.
>> Um you know, I I I have a master's
degree in in genetics from Illinois
State University under the toutelage of
Dr. Herman Brockman uh where I did work
on um the adinine 3 locus in the roasper
cassa looking for um the uh carcinogenic
I should say the mutagenic effects of
various carcinogens and then at the
University of Illinois or Banner
Champagne I I did more lipid
biochemistry and mamalian genetics and
then at Yale University I I continued to
study um glyolippid biochemistry
uh genetics in relation ationship to
epile predominantly epilepsy and
ganglioide biochemistry.
Um I I started we started to look at at
glycosphingal lip is in tumor cells but
it had no relevance to um managing the
disease any more than just um data
collection on what on what these
glyolippids might might appear to look
like in normal versus tumor tissue. And
when I left Yale, uh, I came here to
Boston College and we continued our
glyolipid studies of tumors. Uh, we
developed some of the most natural and
and singular best uh, mouse models for
glyopblasto.
Um, and we've been uh, investigating
those studies uh, for a number of years.
However, um we we we started we were
doing ketogenic diet therapy on epilepsy
and and eventually we did calorie
restriction and ketogenic diet therapy
on the tumors. Uh there's there's one
thing that I would say the vast majority
of people who study cancer, cancer
research is concerned with basic
scientific questions, not how you
eliminate the tumor. uh we started to uh
change our direction from understanding
uh the basic biochemistry to using our
knowledge of what is keeping the tumor
cells alive uh to killing them. Um so it
wasn't I I find that you know it's just
most people study cancer they they don't
they're not there experimental programs
are not designed to eliminate cancer. So
we started to make this shift and we
found in our research that tumor cells
cannot live without fermentation. Uh
which Otto Warberg had had said many
many years ago. But the field had
drifted so far into the genetics uh of
cancer uh that they lost sight of the
underlying uh problem with energy
because you can study.
>> How do you think that happened? Uh well
as many this drift
>> the drift came for many reasons. Um uh
the the the uh uh there was a lot of
concern about some of Otto Warberg's
findings. There was some personal
personality issues. Um but the genetic
explosion quantification came with
Watson and Crick's identification of DNA
as the genetic material followed by
Jacob Manode showing with the operon
that mutations can under can uh uh drive
biochemistry and I and I think these com
combinations together with the findings
that all these cancers have genetic
abnormalities in the nucleus um
chromosomeal as well as point mutations.
It just became a feeding frenzy on
genetic problems in tumor cells. Um
because it was sexy, it was quantitative
and it uh a and people began to realize
this and then it exploded more and more
with these ankco genes and tumor
suppressor genes. And then the National
Cancer Institute um uh saying that
cancer is a genetic disease 100
different diseases and all this kind of
stuff. and the field the field and not
only in the United States, the world the
world cancer field uh drifted uh over to
all this genetic stuff and I started
taking a deep look uh at the and I never
I listen in my classes when I was
teaching genetics and things I would say
cancer is a genetic disease. It was just
a silent assumption. Everybody know
cancer is a genetic disease because all
the experts and Nobel Prize guys are all
getting this recognition. The National
Cancer Institute. But then then I made
some fundamental observations um u
looking at all of these nuclear transfer
experiments that were not done to test
the somatic mutation theory but were
done to ask whether a cancer nucleus
could drive normal development. And
interestingly enough it could up until a
point when the embryo aborted. um but no
disregulated cell growth occurred
despite the so-called presence of the
tumor suppressor genes and anko genes
and all these kinds of things. So I said
what the hell is going on here? The
these studies should have provided
direct support because cancer is
disregulated cell growth cell division
out of control. Well if you and it was
somatic mutation theory says mutations
and ankco genes and tumor suppressor
genes are responsible for disregulated
cell growth in the nucleus. So when I
take a cancer nucleus, when when a
cancer nucleus is implanted into a
normal cytoplasm, why were there no
disregulated growth in those cells? Why
could a a mouse or a frog or something
like this form up to a point in
development without without disregulated
cell growth? This was a a shock for
anyone who has any understanding of
evolutionary biology.
How is it possible that you could put a
nucleus of a tumor cell into a normal
cytoplasm and get regulated cell growth
according to the sematic mutation
theory? On the other hand, how is it
possible that you could take the nucleus
of a normal non neoplastic non-cancerous
cell and put it into the cytoplasm of a
tumor cell and get this regulated cell
growth. This is just the absolute
opposite of what the sematic mutation
theory said. Then when I started to do a
deeper dive, I showed that there are
some cancers that have no mutations.
Well, how in the hell can you say uh
cancer is a genetic disease when there
are some cancer cells that have no and
when I talk to people now, well, I never
heard of these explore. They don't read
the scientific literature like I do.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ keto for cancer,
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rockermeer. Within this
new community platform, you can connect
with other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford, we will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and hyperaric
oxygen protocols. So, take a look around
at school.com/ keto for cancer.
And then they said, well, only driver
genes are the ones that cause the
disregulated cell growth, not all
mutations. Well, now we find all these
driver genes in normal tissues that
never become cancer. How you explain
that? So between the nuclear transfer
experiments, driver genes in normal
tissues and cancer cells without
mutations, this means the entire somatic
mutation theory of cancer is flawed at
its very foundation. So therefore,
cancer cannot be a genetic disease.
Period. It's but you know when you tell
people like that, it's like changing
their religion. They can't accept what I
just said despite looking at the data.
>> They say, "Oh, there must be another
explanation. Oh, they're they always
have some superficial uh explanation for
the for the foundational principle that
cancer is not a genetic disease. So then
you go back and look carefully at what
Otto Warberg said. All cancer cells for
are fermenttors. As a matter of fact,
our big discovery was that cancer cells
can not only ferment glucose uh
producing lactic acid as a waste
product, but they can also have amino
acid fermentation, they can ferment
glutamine. Otto Warberg did not know
about this. Almost the entire cancer
metabolism field does not know about
this. But we have now published papers
clearly showing that mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation in the
mitochondria itself is a fermentation
mechanism that can produce energy in the
absence of glucose and in the absence of
oxygen. So the mitochondria
can produce energy through two
predominant mechanisms. One is oxidative
phosphorilation which is normal
respiration and the second is substrate
level phosphorilation at the suanial coa
ligase reaction in the TCA cycle dumping
dumping suinic acid out of the cell and
we all know uh it's reported all that
lactic acid and suinic acid are two
major uh acid acidification waste
products of cancer cells. This makes
perfect sense when we see people with
heart attacks that their bloodstream
fills up with lactic acid and suinic
acid from these are the waste products
of substrate level phosphorilation in
the cytoplasm using glucose as the fuel
and mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation in the mitochondria
using glutamine. It's glutamine driven
glutaminolysis in the in the TCA cycle
dumping out suinic acid into the into
the outside the cell into the
bloodstream. We we see this in cancer
patients. We see this in the cancer
field. The problem is most I it's it's
shocking. Almost no one not no one but I
would say minuscule people can even
understand what I just said even though
the evidence is there. They have no clue
about mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. Yet it's in all the
biochemical test books. Every bio test
book says you can get a you can get a
small amount of ATP at the suil coa.
Well in cancer cells that's ripping.
That's a very high source of ATP in a
cancer cell just as the glycolysis
mechanism in a cancer cell. However, new
information shows that pyuvate kynise M2
isopform which is present in the
majority of cancers produces lactic acid
with minimal ATP. So we we don't even
know how much energy is coming how much
ATP is being produced in in by through
glycolysis in the tumor cell through
fermentation. But we do know that you're
getting plenty of ATP. We've done all
the experiments at a mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorilation. Even in
the presence of oxygen, they're
producing suinic acid. Consequently,
there's a huge misunderstanding in the
cancer field. They're thinking oxos
oxidative phosphorilation is normal in
cancer cell. They take in oxygen and
they produce ATP. But that ATP is not
produced from oxidative phosphorilation.
It's produced from substrate level
phosphorilation. This is a big
breakthrough in the cancer field. Where
does the oxygen go? The oxygen is used
for producing reactive oxygen species R
O. They are the origin of the mutations
that you see in the nucleus. So the ROSS
are carcinogenic and mutagenic. Now when
the when the cell starts to become
ferment fermentative suffocating they
turn on ankco genes. Ankco genes are
facilitators
of bringing in large amounts of glucose
and glutamine to allow this tumor cell
to grow and produce energy through
fermentation mechanisms. When you put
the when you put the uh cancer nucleus
back into a normal cytoplasm, the ankco
genes turn off as would be expected
because the is now respiring.
>> All of this now makes perfect sense.
It's supported by massive amounts of
data. It's the problem is the cancer
field either refuses to know this or is
incapable uh of understanding the
biochemistry of what I I've just I've
just said. I'm working with Dr.
Shannonopoulos Christo Shannonopoulos
from Seml Weiss University on this
project and he is the world's leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. He has studied this for
decades and he's publishing my the two
of us are publishing papers documenting
that these cancer cells now they do have
some oxidative phosphorilation
capability. There's no question about
it.
>> Yeah.
>> The problem is it's insufficient to
drive disregulated growth in the absence
of fermentation. So you have to real
tumor cell that can survive in the
absence of glucose and glutamine. They
can't burn fatty acids. As a matter of
fact, our new recent paper just came out
showing that the the cancer cells store
fatty acids as lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm because they can't use the
lipids. So, this is a protective
mechanism to prevent the tumor cell from
dying. So, if you look at all major
human cancers, they're loaded with lipid
droplets in the cytoplasm. That's a it's
a it's a biioarker for oxfos
insufficiency because if oxidative
phosphorilation were sufficient, you
wouldn't be storing lipids and droplets
in the cytoplasm. So we're putting all
the findings together and we're coming
out with some big uh summary papers and
the hard data papers. Uh and I don't
know how long it's going to take the
cancer field to come to realize this.
But when you realize the nature of the
problem, then you can devise logical
strategies for managing cancer. You
know, um we have 1,700 people a day
dying from cancer in the United States.
That's 70 people an hour. Okay. No. Um
why? because they're being treated by by
nonsense uh therapies not based on the
correct theory. The tumor cells cannot
survive without glucose and glutamine.
They cannot switch to ketone bodies or
fatty acids. This tells you right off
the bat how you manage cancer without
toxicity. You just use diets and drugs
to take away glucose and glutamine and
then and then you bring in specific
drugs to target the glutaminolysis
pathway. So I mean right there is the
solution to the cancer problem that will
eventually become the standard of care.
But, you know, I don't know. You can
tell me. I I don't know what I said. I
might as well be talking in
hieroglyphics or or or speaking in some
form.
>> No, no.
>> Yeah. You know,
>> no, no, that's that's that's a great
summary. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Well, that's because we we
understand what we're doing and we have
decades of research and hard evidence
that I'm doing in the lab all the time
to test my hypothesis, which is
essentially what Warberg said a long
time ago. But he did not he did not know
about mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. He did not know about
the PKM2 isoform. So uh and he did not
know that oxygen consumption is not a
good marker for oxidative
phosphorilation in tumor cells. So you
put that together and then you have the
explanation for the confusion. Once the
people understand it'll be crystal clear
about what the cancer is and how to
manage it.
>> You know what I think is strange? Uh we
use the PET scan to to to to see if a
person has cancer and the PET scan uses
glucose to to to to show the cancer.
Then uh that person is uh is is uh is
told that
that uh she or he must eat at least 50
55% of carbohydrates
to to to to
eat carbohydrates to live and do
chemotherapy. That that's nonsense.
>> Well, this is what I'm talking about. At
least you understand the craziness of
what's happening. I I uh the human brain
uh when it's indoctrinated uh cannot
think rationally. Uh and the semantic
mutation theory has uh indoctrinated the
human brain uh where they cannot think
any longer about bio traditional
biochemistry or this kind of thing.
You're 100% correct. When we do uh
calorierestricted ketogenic diets
simultaneously targeting the guess what
the PET scan goes away the the you don't
see the tumor anymore. [laughter]
>> It's just that if you want your tumor to
be big and and so the so the radiologist
can see big tumor get as high your high
your blood sugar get your glucose as
high as you possibly can. This will make
the uh the radiation guy very excited to
see this great bright tumor. Uh if you
don't want to see that, lower your blood
sugar, elevate your ketones, and all of
a sudden the tumor light no the tumor no
long the cells start to die and there's
no more uptake and you have to take away
both glucose and glutamine
simultaneously and then you kill the
tumor.
>> Yeah. Do you can do you use uh fasting
too or just the keto diet?
>> No. No. fasting. We, you know, when we
first wrote all this stuff, we did
calorie restriction. Um, but calorie
restriction in the mouse that we studied
is comparable to water only fasting in a
human due to the differences in basil
metabolic rate. Don't forget the mouse's
heartbeat is 650 beats a minute. You
know, ours is what? Your head would blow
off if you had that kind of [laughter]
>> Yeah.
>> Right. So people don't understand that
there is a difference in basil metabolic
rate between a mouse and and a human. Um
but you know the the bottom line is that
um yeah there are fundamental
differences and you have to be able to
put those uh into perspective but but
the tumor the human tumor is driven by a
fermentation mechanism due to
abnormalities in the number structure
and function of mitochondria. So
therefore cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. Uh the mutations in
the nucleus are downstream effects of
the reactive oxygen species produced
from the damaged or inefficient
mitochondria.
All this makes perfect sense.
>> Yeah. What do do you think that the the
the ingestion of sugar are linked to to
the this this meta mitochondrial
dysfunction?
>> Um I I don't think it's just sugar. I
think it's systemic inflammation. Um I I
I think type two diabetes, obesity, we
have an obesity epidemic in the United
States. I think the world I think
there's more obese people in the world
than than starving people in the world.
>> Um obesity o obesity uh creates systemic
inflammation. Inflammation will
chronically damage oxidative
phosphorilation efficiency in a
particular population of cells in a
particular organ depending on on other
factors as well. So uh this can then
lead to chronic disturbances of energy
uh leading to a shift from respiration
to fermentation leading to disregulated
cell growth. The mitochondria maintain
the differentiated state the quiescent
state when that organel loses grip on
producing energy. The cell falls back on
ancient fermentation pathways where
there was no regulation of growth. So
this is all linked if you I found I f
I've come to realize that almost very
very few people in the cancer biology
field uh have any clue about
evolutionary biology or biochemistry.
They may say they do but when you ask
them they have no clue uh about the
linkages. All cells uh in our planet on
our planet evolved uh in a fermentation
environment uh before oxygen. There was
a time in the history of the earth when
no oxygen was in the atmosphere but
living organisms were there all of all
of which fermented and they would die
when the fermentation fuels disappeared
because they and they were growth
disregulated. These cancer cells are
doing nothing more than falling back on
ancient fermentation pathways and will
continue to grow as long as they have
access to fermentable fuels. So the
logical strategy for managing cancer is
targeting the availability of the two
fuels that we have found and others that
drive the disregulated cell growth
transitioning the whole body to fatty
acids and ketones which cannot which the
normal cells in our body can use but the
tumor cells cannot thereby they become
metabolically marginalized and
eventually up and die and the immune
system will come in and clean them up.
So I've seen this happen over and over
again. Um, the problem is, um, nobody I
don't know, uh, if you understand it,
then you're one of the few guys on the
planet that actually understands what I
said because nobody else understands
what I'm saying. [laughter]
>> Yeah. Do you think do you think that
that this this this
going backwards to fermentation in the
cancer cells is the the the the the
link the missing link between the the
the
mitochondrial dysfunction and the the
the mutations in DNA? Do you think that
this fermentation gives the cell some
kind of uh let's say quote unquote
superpower to become ancient cells and
grow exponentially?
>> I I don't know completely about that. um
you know the cell the cell if it's
fermenting and collecting mutations
because we know that most cancer cells
not all cancer cells have a lot of
different broken chromosomes and point
mutations um which have been documented
to come from reactive oxygen species. So
uh because the organ as I said the
organel that controls the cell cycle
that regulates the cycle uh because
cells need to be replaced like for
example liver regeneration
um a regenerating liver can uh the cells
in regenerating liver can grow faster
than most if not all cancer cells but
they don't use fermentation metabolism
they use oxidative phosphorilation.
Um so clearly rapid cell growth does not
require fermentation. uh cancer cells
can uh from they have disregulated cell
growth. The difference between the liver
regeneration and the hepatoma which is a
liver cancer is one has regulated cell
growth driven by oxidative
phosphorilation and the other has
disregulated cell growth driven by
fermentation. So um so this is the this
is the key and this is what Warberg had
said. Wor Warberg was essentially
correct. Uh but he just did not have
newer information that kind of
solidifies more of what he had found.
And we're doing that right now.
Obviously, everything that I have
discovered in my research was based on
Otto Warberg's original uh suggestion
that cancer was a mitochondrial
metabolic disorder. Uh but he just did
not connect he did several things. He
did not connect the disregulated cell
growth to mitochondrial abnormality. Nor
did he exploit uh use use the knowledge
to make uh fundamental treatments for
cancer patients. So um uh and there were
a little some contradictions in some of
the things that he said but basically he
was mostly correct. So all we had to do
is dust off his original findings and
then re-evaluate them in light of new
information and now come to the
realization that cancer is primarily a
disorder of disregulated mitochondrial
function uh linked to disregulated cell
growth because the mitochondria control
the cell cycle. So they are the organel
that allows a cell to go through a cell
cycle and know when to stop. uh and when
that organel becomes corrupted, this
cell continues to proliferate driven by
a fermentation metabolism. So the the
keys to the understanding the kingdom
reside in the mitochondria. Uh the
mitochondria uh are the are are calling
the shots are underlying uh the
regulation of energy, metabolism, growth
and quiescence of the cell. And when
that organel becomes corrupted either
the cell up and dies directly or or if
it can bypass oxos it then falls into
this fermentation disregulated cell
growth.
>> Yeah. In the light of what you said
about mitochondria what do you think
about the the role of uh seed oils in
the in the generation of can cancer?
>> I I have no comment. I I never tested
it. I I never tested that. If anybody
can show that seed oils damage oxidative
phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory fermentation then you
should be concerned about it. But you
know I I maybe I mean if it's a if it
increases okay you you you take seed
oils and put it on a on a on a normal
cell in vitro uh does it cause that cell
to become tumorogenic? I have no idea.
If if you if you consume large amounts
of seed oil and your C reactive protein
in the bloodstream goes up, then that's
a marker of inflammation. And it would
said would say only that seed oils
increase inflammation and that
inflammation can damage oxidative
phosphorilation. It's a it's a risk
factor for disregulated cell growth. Do
I don't know. Have there been any
studies showing that consumption of seed
seed oil increases stomach inflammation?
If so, then you should be concerned
about it. Uh, do the experiments. I
don't know. I mean, just drink go home
and drink a gallon of seed oil and then
see if your C reactive protein goes up.
[laughter]
>> No, thank you.
>> Well, I don't know. Somebody you pay
somebody, they'll do it, right?
[laughter]
>> And uh uh uh uh what about uh uh Dr.
Ciphid? What about the the How are we in
the the the cancer therapy? How are we
uh what about your press post technique
that you developed with uh Dagosino and
others?
>> Yeah.
>> How how are you using it? Uh are people
using it?
>> Yeah, they they're using it but not it's
not part of the standard of care. Uh you
have to you have to be irdiated and
poisoned uh before they realize that
when it doesn't work then they say oh
maybe we should try something else. Um
the issue here is we can manage most
cancers effectively if if the if the
oncologists had had uh could understand
what I said. Um a lot of them do
understand what I'm saying but the
system does not allow them to put that
into practice. Um so there's a there's a
there's a real problem here. One is the
lack of knowledge and the second is the
uh utilization of new knowledge in the
clinic. So um uh you know so press pulse
is the strategy that will eventually
become the standard of care um for
majority of cancer patients um which
uses a combination of metabolic
uh therapy together with some
traditional chemotherapy.
But we use we can we think based on
other research and our findings that you
can use very very very small amounts of
chemo uh when the body is in a state of
nutritional ketosis to get a very
maximum therapeutic benefit which will
significantly reduce toxicity. As I say
in many cases in these podcasts we have
all of the tools necessary for effective
non-toxic management of cancer as as we
have today. The problem is the majority
of folks working in the field have have
do not understand how to best use those
tools uh to solve the problem. So it's
it's an educational mission as as well
as it is an actual practical
application.
>> I think there is a there is some kind of
of a blindness that come from the the
pharmaceutical industry that have to
profit sometimes
>> from these drugs.
>> Yeah. Well, that's true. Um, that, you
know, they they have to profit, but they
should let the cancer patient know. They
should tell the the phys But you see the
the pharmaceutical guys are not in the
clinic treating the cancer patients for
the most part. The most on we call them
an oncologists.
They're they're the people that are
treating the cancer patients using pharm
drugs that were developed by the
pharmaceutical industry. But very few
oncologists
will tell the patient that uh profit um
revenue generation is the most important
aspect for your disease secondary to
your outcome. So you know they would
never say that to a patient. You know
they would never say that you know thank
god you're in my office because we can
make a tremendous profit on your
sickness. Um you know they don't want to
say that and and and it would be immoral
for them to say that. Um but they but
the ultimate that's ultimately what
what's going on is that many of the
drugs that are that are being treat that
are being used to treat cancer patients
um do not target uh glucose and
glutamine or transition the body to
nutritional ketosis. So uh we have a
problem here. Um and some oncologists
never never heard of Otto Warberg. Many
oncologists and and as you said at the
beginning uh giving uh many think
glucose has nothing to do uh with tumor
growth despite the PET scanning and all
this kind of stuff. So uh what you have
a an incredible lack of knowledge uh on
the part of the practitioners who are
treating cancer patients throughout the
world. Um so something I I don't know
something has to be done otherwise we
get uh I mean cancer is supposed to
overtake heart disease in the next few
years. How could that be possible when
we clearly understand how cancer
uh starts and we clearly understand how
it grows and we clearly understand how
to stop it. uh and and yet it's going to
overtake heart disease when we really
und I understand cancer much better than
I understand epileptic seizures and I
worked in the epilepsy field for years.
It's not clear how diet therapies block
epileptic seizures a at the mechanistic
level but we clearly understand how uh
metab ketogenic metabolic therapy
together with glutamine targeting drugs
stop cancer. I mean it's very clear um
for those who want to understand the
biochemistry and biology behind it. So
there has to be a re-educational
mission. That that's what it has to be.
>> Yeah. Yeah. You're right. You're right.
And uh uh so so we can we can close. I
don't want to I don't want to take too
much of your time. Uh what can we do to
as you said uh let let me rephrase that.
Let as you said cancer is a is a disease
a metabolic disease. So how can we
prevent cancer? How how how what what
metabolical measures can we take so we
do not have cancer? Is there any other
factor in our society in our environment
that can lead to cancer besides the this
metabolic approach?
>> Well
>> like some toxins and things like that.
>> Yeah. Well, you know, it depends. Um,
our ancestors certainly cancer was
extremely low. What's going on? Why are
they why would Aboriginal folks uh you
know
physicians Albert Schwitzer the
humanitarian physician studied primitive
folks and one of his um folks people
tribes and people that lived according
to traditional ways not corrupted by
western diets and lifestyle. Um cancer
was extremely rare in these populations.
Uh so clearly what's the difference
between western civilization and some of
these ancestral tribes? Why is cancer so
high in in folks that live according to
the western diet and lifestyle? A and
the answer is um uh inflammation and all
these other things that damage
mitochondria. So you can cancer is
extremely rare
if mitochondria can remain healthy.
Okay. H how do you maintain
mitochondrial health? Avoid systemic
inflammation, exercise, uh stress, a lot
of the things that uh damage um um
respiration. When you put it all
together, you have you have to realize
that that um humans today
uh are are much less active than they
were decades uh a century ago because of
all of our technologies.
Uh commercialization of highly processed
carbohydrates is a worldwide
pro uh issue. Uh we can ship food all
over the world. Most of the folks in the
ancestral period uh were eating
locaphor. They were growing and living
on foods that were in their local local
environment. They weren't uh uh taking
food that was processed that would last
for long periods of time. Most foods,
not all. Um a and uh they were more
active and they were less inflamed. Uh
so they had a much lower risk for
cancer. And um as I said, we have an
obesity epidemic
uh in in in the United States and many
other countries now. And um obesity has
replaced smoking as a number one risk
factor for cancer. So if people were
really really interested in preventing
cancer, you wouldn't find many obese
people um because they would be
concerned. they would know that their
obesity puts them at risk for
disregulated cell growth. So obviously
they either never heard of this or they
don't care. Um and as I said uh you know
we evolved as a as a species for
hundreds of thousands of years as hunter
gatherers eating mostly animals and
whatever anything if we're humans are
omnivores. What does that mean? You can
eat almost anything walks, crawls, or
flies on the planet, you can find
something to eat. Um, well, this this
tells us that we did not have very many
highly processed carbohydrates
in our diet. We were starving most of
the time. So, our ability to store
energy is supreme among many many
animals. So, you today now you have
massive amounts of easily accessible,
highly processed carbohydrates. You have
an obesity epidemic, systemic
inflammation, type two diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, dementia. You
all of these are consequences of damage
to in one way or another to the uh
metabolic homeostasis of the body and
you get cancer. This is not a mystery.
Our technology has evolved faster than
our biology and as a result we have an
obesity cancer epidemic and uh it ain't
going away anytime soon as long as folks
don't have any clue about about what I
just said.
>> But you know that then everybody is
everybody can take charge of their own
existence on the planet. They they know
if they know that obesity and all this
other stuff puts them at risk then they
have an opportunity to reduce that. But
if they have no clue, then they continue
to persist and everybody says, "Oh,
where did all this cancer come from? I
just told you where it came from." So,
and it's very clear. So, what do you
think about uh the cancer in uh in
child? Uh is there was there any enough
time to to this metabolic dysfunction uh
uh get in or is is this this kind of
cancer are genetic ones? No, I all the
genetic ones um what we call germline
cancers cancers that are inherited
neuropromattosa there's a whole bunch of
them leaf many bracka one all these um
don't forget that that people are born
with those uh but often times they don't
show up until the adult age and what we
found is that in every one of the
cancers that has a genetic germline
linkage uh mitochondrial uh dysfunction
is seen so they're all fermenttors now
the young young kids um that develop
tumors like they're born sometimes with
cancer or or it develops very early
after uh in very early ages of life. Um
we're not sure how how what was the
trigger or all we know is that when we
look at the cells they're fermenting
like adult cancers. So whatever happened
in that early developmental stage
mitochondria were corrupted uh from some
whether it's a toxin whether it's a
intermittent hypoxia whatever it was
damaged mitochondria in a population of
cells even in that early stage of of
life leading to disregulated cell
growth. How do we know this? Because
when we look at the mitochondria and
biochemistry of these childhood cancers
uh they're fermentors. uh they have
mitochondrial abnormalities and they're
fermenting. So, how did that happen in
such a young child? Well, we we're not
really sure, but all but we do know is
that we know how to manage it uh when
when you have it. Okay, so that's the
most important thing. What and it and it
doesn't involve uh massive surgical
mutilations, uh poisoning, radiation,
and all the crazy stuff they do to these
little kids. Um so and that speaks to
our fundamental lack of knowledge which
is tragic uh that we would take these
small children and do such horrible uh
nonsensical absurd things to in the in
in the name of trying to help them when
when when we should be when we should be
targeting their glucose and glutamine
and keeping them in nutritional ketosis.
Um and that will work. The problem is
they have no clue what I just said. They
think cancer is a genetic disease and
thereby they continue to mindlessly
focus on downstream epiphenomena that
are not related to the prime prime issue
of the of the problem. And as long as
they continue to do that, we're going to
sustain this tragic outcome not only for
children but for for for many adults.
And I'm seeing more and more cancer in
in people in their in their 30s and 40s.
I mean what's going on with this? uh but
all their tumors are fermenting and um
you know it doesn't make any difference
what the origin we know how to manage it
once you have the tumor we know how to
manage it the problem is the field
doesn't understand what I said
>> yeah I got it I got it Dr.
I want to thank you for your time. I
know you're a very busy busy scientist
and uh I want to thank you so much for
what the work you do. I think uh hear
from you about this this uh
unfortunately not so knowing not so uh
uh knowing theory let's say like that
and uh uh I think that if we can spread
this word to more and more people so the
people can understand how how cancer
work work and uh about this fermentation
thing and all this this knowledge that
you put here in this this podcast. I
think it's going to be uh it's our way
to show the world that we have to
rethink cancer and uh who knows if we
can uh uh do this in our lifetime.
>> Yeah. Well, the other thing that's
important too is cancer patients should
know that a lot of the success
rests on their shoulders of motivation.
uh the best outcome we have seen are for
those individuals who de who read what
I'm saying and become highly motivated
and who can play a major role in
reducing their blood sugar and elevating
their ketones with through water only
fasting or uh calorierestricted
ketogenic diets any kind of a diet that
will lower glucose and elevate ketones
um can put the patient uh will can slow
the tumor the growth of the tumor then
the drugs come in and many of these
drugs are available uh to people. So um
so the the the the cancer patient should
know that they are in they are in charge
of their destiny um and they can play a
big role which is empowering to the
cancer patient and it's always effective
if they have a a um um a care provider
that understands this and that can help
them uh adjust uh their therapy as as
they progress through the management
process. So this is the future and uh it
it will happen in all major countries as
soon as the word gets out that cancer is
a mitochondrial metabolic disorder and
not a genetic disorder.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I think so. And uh uh what
about what about your books? Your books
are you writing some new one?
>> No, I he writing the the the the old one
the cancer as a metabolic disease.
>> Yeah. Well, that's selling more copies
now than ever. So, um
>> Yeah. Great.
>> Which is But I only wrote one book. So,
there's some pirated information out
there on the web thinking that I wrote
all these books. I didn't write. I only
wrote one book. So, uh people should
know that. And
>> are you planning to rewrite in that?
>> Uh make an update. Well, not anytime
soon because what I what I have to do is
to I have to do the research and publish
the science uh to validate uh what I'm
saying. Mo most of the stuff was already
published in the book. Uh um but I but
I'm learning more uh in our chapter 8 we
speculated on mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorilation. Now we have hard
data to support that. Um, yeah. So, I
mean, most of what I most of what the
cancer problem was identified in the
book. Um, yes. And and at some point I
might consider writing a second uh but
right but right now I I have to work to
get this the message out in
scientifically peer-reviewed
publications. So, at least we have the
platform of science uh to to rest our
our evidence on.
>> Great. Great. Okay. Dr. Ciphford, thank
you very much for your time. Thank you
for your patience and uh keep on the
good work. I think you're I think we're
going to have many many papers
>> on the future.
>> Yeah. Well, thank you very much,
Enrique. It was very nice to be here.
Thank you.